Consul Docs : Add external authorization (ext_authz) support for API gateways (#2776)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/consul/v2.0.x/content/docs/north-south/api-gateway/secure-traffic/ext-authz/k8s.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Delegate authorization for API gateways to an external service on Kubernetes
description: Learn how to delegate authorization for requests to Consul API gateways to an external service with the ext-authz Envoy extension on Kubernetes.
---

# Delegate API gateway authorization to an external service on Kubernetes

> <EnterpriseAlert> This feature is available in Consul Enterprise. </EnterpriseAlert>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@include 'alerts/enterprise-alert.mdx'
```

I think we should use the standard partial to permit uniform language and avoid leftovers in case we change it.

This topic describes how to delegate authorization for requests to Consul API gateways to an external service on Kubernetes-orchestrated networks. If your services are deployed to virtual machines, refer to [Delegate API gateway authorization to an external service on virtual machines](/consul/docs/north-south/api-gateway/secure-traffic/ext-authz/vm).

## Overview

> The [external authorization Envoy extension](/consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-authz) (`builtin/ext-authz`) directs Envoy to call an external authorization service before it forwards a request to an upstream. When you set the extension's `ProxyType` to `api-gateway`, Consul applies external authorization to north-south traffic that the API gateway routes to services in the mesh.

Reviewer: > When you set the extension's `ProxyType` to `api-gateway`, Consul applies external authorization to north-south traffic that the API gateway routes to services in the mesh.

From the /consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-authz seems that both `api-gateway` and `connect-proxy` permit to apply external authorization to north-south traffic that the API gateway routes to services in the mesh. Is that wrong?

Author: Both proxy types support the extension, but they attach at different points. connect-proxy applies ext-authz at a service's sidecar (east-west, at the destination). To enforce it at the API gateway itself for north-south traffic entering the mesh, you must set ProxyType to api-gateway, since the extension is attached to the gateway's ServiceDefaults. I'll clarify this wording.

You can control external authorization at three levels:

- Gateway-wide: The `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation on the `Gateway` resource sets the default posture for all routes attached to the gateway.
- Per-route: A [`RouteAuthFilter`](/consul/docs/reference/k8s/api-gateway/routeauthfilter) referenced by an `HTTPRoute`, or the `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation on an `HTTPRoute`, overrides the gateway-wide posture.

> - Extension: The extension itself must be applied to the gateway through the gateway's `ServiceDefaults` for any of these toggles to take effect.

Reviewer: This one seems to be a mandatory step to make the other two work right?

If so it does not constitute a "level" of granularity but rather a toggle.

Author: Correct — applying the extension is a mandatory prerequisite, not a granularity level. I'll present the two levels as gateway-wide and per-route, and move "apply the extension" out into a prerequisite step.

Complete the following steps to delegate API gateway authorization to an external service:

1. Apply the external authorization extension to the API gateway's `ServiceDefaults` resource.
1. Set the gateway-wide authorization posture with an annotation on the `Gateway`.
1. Optionally override the posture for specific routes with a `RouteAuthFilter` or annotation.

> 1. Apply the resources to your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Apply the external authorization extension to the API gateway's `ServiceDefaults` resource.](#apply-the-extension-to-the-api-gateway)
1. [Set the gateway-wide authorization posture with an annotation on the `Gateway`.](#set-the-gateway-wide-authorization-posture)
1. [Optionally override the posture for specific routes with a `RouteAuthFilter` or annotation.](#override-the-posture-for-specific-routes)
1. [Apply the resources to your cluster.](#apply-the-configuration-entry)
```

Adding links to the different sections to simplify navigation.

## Requirements

- Consul Enterprise 2.0.2 or later
- An API gateway deployed and configured to route to one or more mesh services
- An external authorization service that implements the Envoy external authorization gRPC or HTTP API

## Apply the extension to the API gateway

Add the external authorization extension to the `ServiceDefaults` resource for your API gateway and set `ProxyType` to `api-gateway`.

> When `ProxyType` is `api-gateway`, you can also point [`Target.URI`](/consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-authz#arguments-config-grpcservice-target-uri) at an authorization service on a remote host. This is not allowed for `connect-proxy` proxies, which require the authorization service to run on localhost.

Reviewer: We are already instructing the user to use `api-gateway` maybe it is not necessary to mention that `connect-proxy` requirea the authorization service to run on localhost

```suggestion
The `api-gateway` `ProxyType` allows to configure [`Target.URI`](/consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-authz#arguments-config-grpcservice-target-uri) to point at an authorization service on a remote host.
```

For the full list of configurable fields, including request and response header controls, refer to the [external authorization extension configuration reference](/consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-authz).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Moved the link to the reference below the example.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="gateway-service-defaults.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: consul.hashicorp.com/v1alpha1
kind: ServiceDefaults
metadata:
  name: api-gateway
spec:
  protocol: http
  envoyExtensions:
  - name: builtin/ext-authz
    arguments:
      ProxyType: api-gateway
      Config:
        GrpcService:
          Target:
            URI: authz.example.com:9191
        AllowedHeaders:
        - Prefix: x-
        DisallowedHeaders:
        - Exact: authorization
          IgnoreCase: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For the full list of configurable fields, including request and response header controls, refer to the [external authorization extension configuration reference](/consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-authz).

```

Moved the link to the reference below the example.

## Set the gateway-wide authorization posture

Add the `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation to the `Gateway` resource to set the default posture for all routes attached to the gateway.

- When you omit the annotation, external authorization is enabled by default for every route.

> - Set the annotation to `disabled` to make external authorization opt-in so that routes must enable it individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The external authorization is enabled by default to all routes attached to `Gateway` resources. 

To have it enabled only for specific routes, set the annotation to `disabled` and enable it individually for the desired routes, as shown in the next section.
```

This section is a bit confusing, my understanding is:
* `ServiceDefaults` toggles ext-authz on for every API GW and defines the ONLY `Target.URI` that is going to be uses for ALL GWs and ALL routes
* `Gateway` ext-authz enabled when `ServiceDefaults` enables it on the `Target.URI` defined there. It is possible to disable it "manually". 
* When `Gateway` ext-authz is disabled, single Rutes can enable it specifically but only on the same `Target.URI` defined in `ServiceDefaults`

Are these correct?

If so, the second step is completely un-necessary to enable cluster-wide ext-authz. 

We could simplify the flow in this way:
* Enable cluster-wide ext-authz (that describes step one, `ServiceDefaults`)
* [OPTIONAL] Enable per-route ext-authz (that describes step two and three)

Author: Your understanding is correct: ServiceDefaults applies the extension and defines the single Target.URI used for that gateway's routes; once applied, external authorization is enabled by default for every route. The Gateway annotation only changes that default (set disabled to make it opt-in) and isn't required to turn it on. Per-route controls only toggle enabled true/false — they can't change the Target.URI. One nuance: this attaches to the specific gateway the ServiceDefaults targets (by metadata.name), so it's per-gateway rather than cluster-wide. I've restructured the flow to: (1) enable gateway-wide via ServiceDefaults, (2) optionally change the default, (3) optionally override per-route — and applied your suggested rewording.

  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /admin
    filters:
    - type: ExtensionRef
      extensionRef:
        group: consul.hashicorp.com
        kind: RouteAuthFilter
        name: admin-ext-authz
    backendRefs:
    - name: admin
      port: 8080
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

### Use an annotation

Alternatively, add the `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation directly to an `HTTPRoute` to override the posture for the routes it defines. Set the value to `enabled` or `disabled`.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="http-route-annotation.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: admin-route
  annotations:
    consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz: enabled
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: api-gateway
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /admin
    backendRefs:
    - name: admin
      port: 8080
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

## Apply the resources

Use the `kubectl apply` command to apply each resource:

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f gateway-service-defaults.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f gateway.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f route-auth-filter.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f http-route.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: These steps could be moved under each section only applying the required files.

---
layout: docs
page_title: Delegate authorization for API gateways to an external service on Kubernetes
description: Learn how to delegate authorization for requests to Consul API gateways to an external service with the ext-authz Envoy extension on Kubernetes.
---

# Delegate API gateway authorization to an external service on Kubernetes

@include 'alerts/enterprise-alert.mdx'

This topic describes how to delegate authorization for requests to Consul API gateways to an external service on Kubernetes-orchestrated networks. If your services are deployed to virtual machines, refer to [Delegate API gateway authorization to an external service on virtual machines](/consul/docs/north-south/api-gateway/secure-traffic/ext-authz/vm).

## Overview

> The [external authorization Envoy extension](/consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-authz) (`builtin/ext-authz`) directs Envoy to call an external authorization service before it forwards a request to an upstream. The extension's `ProxyType` field determines where Consul attaches it. Set `ProxyType` to `connect-proxy` to enforce authorization at a service's sidecar proxy for east-west traffic. Set `ProxyType` to `api-gateway` to attach the extension to the API gateway itself so that Consul applies external authorization to north-south traffic that the gateway routes to services in the mesh. This topic describes the `api-gateway` case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [external authorization Envoy extension](/consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-authz) (`builtin/ext-authz`) instructs Envoy to call an external authorization service before it forwards a request to an upstream. 

Consul uses the extension's `ProxyType` field to determine the external service to use for the authentication:

- When `ProxyType` is set to `connect-proxy`, authorization is enforced at a service's sidecar proxy level. This is used for east-west traffic.
- When `ProxyType` is set to `api-gateway` the extension is applied to the API gateway itself and an external authorization is applied to the requests received by the API gateway. This is used for north-south traffic.

This topic describes the `api-gateway` case.
```

Applying the extension to the gateway through the gateway's `ServiceDefaults` is a prerequisite for external authorization. None of the following controls take effect until you apply the extension.

After you apply the extension, you can control external authorization at two levels:

- Gateway-wide: The `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation on the `Gateway` resource sets the default authorization behavior for all routes attached to the gateway.
- Per-route: A [`RouteAuthFilter`](/consul/docs/reference/k8s/api-gateway/routeauthfilter) referenced by an `HTTPRoute`, or the `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation on an `HTTPRoute`, overrides the gateway-wide default.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can control external authorization at two levels:

- Gateway-wide: the external authorization is configured using the `ServiceDefaults` configuration entry. This enables the external authorization for all the API gateways in the datacenter and all the routes associated with them and is a necessary step also for the per-route configuration.
-  Per-route configuration: the external authorization is disabled at the gateway level and enabled individually for each route that requires it. This is configured by:
  -  Setting the `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation to `false` on the API gateway configuration entry. This disables the external authorization for the gateway.
  - Setting the external authorization for the single routes either by setting a  [`RouteAuthFilter`](/consul/docs/reference/k8s/api-gateway/routeauthfilter) configuration entry and referencing it in the `HTTPRoute` configuration entry or directly in the `HTTPRoute` configuration entry using the `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation.
```

I am not conviced with the naming `Gateway-wide`, do you think that cluster-wide or datacenter-wide is a better name for it?

Complete the following steps to configure external authorization:

1. [Apply the external authorization extension to the API gateway's `ServiceDefaults` resource.](#apply-the-extension-to-the-api-gateway) This step enables external authorization for all routes attached to the gateway.
1. Optionally, [change the gateway-wide default](#set-the-gateway-wide-authorization-behavior) so that external authorization is opt-in.

> 1. Optionally, [override external authorization for specific routes](#override-the-authorization-behavior-for-specific-routes) with a `RouteAuthFilter` or annotation.

Reviewer: I would remove this section and add the links in the bullet list above. Check [my comment](https://github.com/hashicorp/web-unified-docs/pull/2776/changes#r3597121806) over the suggested structure before removing this.

## Requirements

- Consul Enterprise 2.0.2 or later
- An API gateway deployed and configured to route to one or more mesh services
- An external authorization service that implements the Envoy external authorization gRPC or HTTP API

> ## Apply the extension to the API gateway

Reviewer: I think that a more logical structure for the page would be the following:

```
## Enable external authorization
Here we define the service defaults procedure

## Override external authorization behavior for specific routes

Here we will have a bullet list that explains the two steps needed, with links to the sections since, being H3 they do not show in the menu on the left.

### Disable external authorization for the API gateway

### Use RouteAuthFilter configuration entry

### Use an annotation in the HTTPRoute configuration entry
```

In this way we make the two different level of configuration explicit even in the page structure.

Add the `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation to the `Gateway` resource and set it to `disabled`.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="gateway.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: api-gateway
  annotations:
    consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz: disabled
spec:
  gatewayClassName: consul
  listeners:
  - name: http-listener
    port: 8443
    protocol: HTTP
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Apply the resource to your cluster:

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f gateway.yaml
```

### Use RouteAuthFilter configuration entry

Define a [`RouteAuthFilter`](/consul/docs/reference/k8s/api-gateway/routeauthfilter) and reference it from an `HTTPRoute` with an `extensionRef` filter. The filter's `spec.extAuthz.enabled` value takes precedence over the gateway-wide default.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="route-auth-filter.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: consul.hashicorp.com/v1alpha1
kind: RouteAuthFilter
metadata:
  name: admin-ext-authz
  namespace: default
spec:
  extAuthz:
    enabled: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Define a [`RouteAuthFilter`](/consul/docs/reference/k8s/api-gateway/routeauthfilter) that uses the external authentication. The filter's `spec.extAuthz.enabled` value takes precedence over the gateway-wide default.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="route-auth-filter.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: consul.hashicorp.com/v1alpha1
kind: RouteAuthFilter
metadata:
  name: admin-ext-authz
  namespace: default
spec:
  extAuthz:
    enabled: true
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Reference the filter from an `HTTPRoute` with an `extensionRef` filter. 

````

Splitted the text between the two code blocks to improve readability.

<CodeBlockConfig filename="http-route.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: admin-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: api-gateway
  rules:
  - matches:
    - path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: /admin
    filters:
    - type: ExtensionRef
      extensionRef:
        group: consul.hashicorp.com
        kind: RouteAuthFilter
        name: admin-ext-authz
    backendRefs:
    - name: admin
      port: 8080
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Apply the resources to your cluster:

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f route-auth-filter.yaml
$ kubectl apply -f http-route.yaml
```

### Use an annotation in the HTTPRoute configuration entry

> Alternatively, add the `consul.hashicorp.com/ext-authz` annotation directly to an `HTTPRoute` to override the authorization behavior for the routes it defines. Set the value to `enabled` or `disabled`.

Reviewer: > Set the value to `enabled` or `disabled`.

What do these option imply?
* **Enabled:** applies the ext-auth as long as it is enabled globally
* **Disabled:** ?? Does this configuration takes precedence over the Gateway-wide? If I disable ext-authz in the HTTP route while enabled in the Gateway resource what does happen?

In the [reference](https://github.com/hashicorp/web-unified-docs/pull/2776/changes#diff-58cfe694678f9804daf4ea9139776f2166773a42645b6702cc8bbb05d5152bedR452) we seem to imply this behavior.  But it might be useful to specify what happens in the two cases.

Author: gateway wide enable and disable are just a defaults , always route level overrides takes precedence 
here the annotation in httproute is route level default  which will apply to all rules in that httproute. If we want to override at path level we can use  rules[].extauthz.enabled flag.

Disabled: ?? Does this configuration takes precedence over the Gateway-wide? If I disable ext-authz in the HTTP route while enabled in the Gateway resource what does happen?
- So as extauthz at route is disable it will be disabled 

The precedence is as follows route.rules.ext.enabled > httproute.annotation > gateway.annotation
